# Intro to AI with GitHub Copilot

## Primary objectives

Note: the objectives in bold are the focus of the instructor led portions of the session.

* **Explain what Generative AI is and how it works.**
* **Understand the strengths and limitations of AI tools, specifically GitHub Copilot.**
* Apply GitHub Copilot chat in VS Code to understand features of an application.
* Utilize GitHub Copilot effectively for generating code snippets.
* **Identify potential limitations and pitfalls of relying solely on AI tools for coding tasks.**
* **Highlight the importance of ethical coding practices, including giving proper credit for code generated by AI tools.**

## Session outline

Note: lecture time should be minimal, allowing as much time as possible for the students to focus on practical application.

| Time | Section                         | Activity                   | Duration |
|------|---------------------------------|----------------------------|----------|
| 0:00 | 1. Software Engineering with AI | Instructor led intro       | 15 min   |
| 0:15 | 2. Getting Started exercise     | Solo exercise              | 30 min   |
| 0:45 | 3. Coding exercise kickoff      | Instructor led intro       | 15 min   |
| 1:00 | 4. Shop Application exercise    | Solo or paired exercise    | 90 min   |
| 2:30 | 5. Review and summary           | Instructor led discussion  | 30 min   |

## Software Engineering with AI

Remembering to keep this brief, discuss Generative AI and how it works at a high-level. 

**Generative AI** is a cutting-edge branch of AI that focuses on creating new content. You can use it to make a wide range of content, including text, images, music, and even program code. While some types of AI utilize predefined rules and algorithms, Generative AI employs deep learning techniques to study and learn from the patterns and structures found in training data. It then uses this knowledge to generate content that closely resembles that produced by human creativity.

Be sure to note that because of the way Generative AI creates content, it can "hallucinate" or make things up. This means that it's important to review and fact-check AI generated content for correctness.

**GitHub Copilot** is a developer tool that uses Generative AI to provide contextual assistance throughout the software development lifecycle. It integrates with common IDEs to provide code completions, larger prompt based code suggestions, and developer focused chat assistance within the IDE. Its goal is to allow developers to focus more on problem solving and collaboration instead of on tedious boilerplate code.

Focus on introducing GitHub Copilot, specifically discussing:
- GitHub Copilot's popularity in industry
- Why the program is introducing this tool now
- GitHub Copilot can suggest _bad_ code that they must review for:
    - **Accuracy**: While GitHub Copilot can provide highly relevant and syntactically correct code snippets, it's not infallible. Students must review and test the suggestions just like code written by a human peer. It's crucial to understand that Copilot generates suggestions based on the patterns it learned during training, which doesn't guarantee the correctness or optimal performance of the code.
    - **Security**: The code generated by Copilot might inadvertently mirror code vulnerabilities present in its training data. Users must review the suggestions carefully for potential security issues, especially when the code involves user input, authentication, or sensitive data processing.

Note usage pitfalls:
- Rapidly accepting GitHub Copilot suggestions without verifying and understanding the code, can quickly make a mess of things.
- Incorrect suggestions from GitHub Copilot aren't always obvious, and may seem reasonable at first.
- Accepting too much code at once can make it challenging to review, test, and debug.
- Be wary of accepting suggestions for code you aren't ready to run and test. (The more time passes, the more likely you are to forget that it's untested generated code.)


## Getting started with AI

This solo student exercise includes reading and practice explaining how to use GitHub Copilot in VS Code. The lesson introduces students to GitHub Copilot by walking them through a series of exercises in VS Code.

This exercise requires the installation of additional VS Code extensions for Copilot:

* https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=GitHub.copilot
* https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=GitHub.copilot-chat

It also requires the students to run Java in VS Code which requires an install of the [Extension Pack for Java](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=vscjava.vscode-java-pack). 

The assignment includes setup instructions for the students, but you may want to note this in your introduction.

## Coding exercise kickoff

At this point students should have any setup issues resolved and have some experience with using GitHub Copilot in VS Code.

Use this time to:
- answer questions
- review and discuss AI code pitfalls
- set students up for the more involved coding exercise

## Coding exercise

You can have the students do this coding exercise either solo or in pairs.

This exercise begins with a partially completed shop inventory management system, separated into Vue frontend and Spring backend with a Postgres database. The setup is similar to a final capstone project with Auth. However, this application uses some patterns that weren't introduced in the main program curriculum. The exercise has students use GitHub Copilot to explain these patterns. Students may then choose to apply them as they code the remaining pieces of the application.

The `Shop Application` includes the following server API routes:

| Description                | Access Role | Request Method | Route                                       |
| -------------------------- | ----------- | -------------- | ------------------------------------------- |
| All apparel items          | Any Role    | `GET`          | `/apparel`                                  |
| One apparel item           | Any Role    | `GET`          | `/apparel/{id}`                             |
| Create apparel             | HQ only     | `POST`         | `/apparel`                                  |
| Update apparel             | HQ only     | `PUT`          | `/apparel/{id}`                             |
| Delete apparel             | HQ only     | `DELETE`       | `/apparel/{id}`                             |
| All shops                  | Any Role    | `GET`          | `/shops`                                    |
| One shop                   | Any Role    | `GET`          | `/shops/{shop_id}`                          |
| Shop inventory (all items) | Any Role    | `GET`          | `/shops/{shop_id}/apparel`                  |
| Shop unlisted inventory    | Any Role    | `GET`          | `/shops/{shop_id}/apparel?inventory=false`  |
| Add item to shop           | Shop only   | `POST`         | `/shops/{shop_id}/apparel/{apparel_id}`     |
| Update quantity            | Shop only   | `PUT`          | `/shops/{shop_id}/apparel/{apparel_id}`     |
| Remove from store          | Shop only   | `DELETE`       | `/shops/{shop_id}/apparel/{apparel_id}`     |

The `Shop Application` also includes the following client views:

| Name                  | Description                                              | Access Role           | Route                           |
| --------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------- | --------------------- | ------------------------------- |
| ApparelListView       | List of all apparel (Click to Add, Edit, Delete)         | HQ only               | `/apparel`                      |
| ApparelDetailView     | Single apparel item (Click to Edit)                      | HQ only               | `/apparel/{apparel_id}`         |
| ShopListView          | List of all shops                                        | Any                   | `/shops`                        |
| ShopDetailView        | Apparel for a shop (Add link, inline Update Qty & Delete)| Any, Shop for update  | `/shops/{shop_id}`              |
| ShopAddApparelView    | List of apparel to add to a shop (Add button for each)   | Shop only             | `/shops/{shop_id}/apparel/add`  |


## Review and summary

Use the majority of this time to review and discuss the student experience with the coding exercise. Ensure that this discussion highlights both the benefits and limitations of using AI coding tools like GitHub Copilot. Contrast this with their experience with the intelligent code completion tools (_Intellisense_) already available in their IDEs.

### Ethical AI use

While these tools offer many benefits, they can also raise ethical questions regarding ownership, accountability, and potential biases in the algorithms.

You may also want to discuss ethical use of AI tools throughout the interview and job application process. Encourage transparency in student work, noting that it's not in the students best interest to hide AI use, particularly in the job search process. Fluency working with AI tools is a valuable job skill, and code attributions can foster discussion about tool usage.

While there are currently no strict requirements for GitHub Copilot code attribution, acknowledging AI generating code is a matter of ethical integrity and transparency. Comments to note AI generated code may also be a helpful indicator for code reviews and troubleshooting.

> Note: This is your opportunity to discuss _your own_ expectations for AI use throughout the remainder of the program, including any requirements for code attribution.

Here are some suggested guidelines for attribution when using Copilot-generated code:
- **Include a comment**: Adding a comment within the code indicating that it's GitHub Copilot generated is a simple and effective way to provide attribution.
- **Mention in application documentation**: If the code is part of a larger project or library, consider mentioning that the project used GitHub Copilot for code generation and assistance in the main project documentation.
- **Credit in Commit Messages**: When committing code changes to version control, you can mention in the commit message that GitHub Copilot generated specific portions of the code.
- **Link to Copilot**: Providing a link to GitHub Copilot or mentioning it in the project's README file can help to acknowledge the tool's contribution to the project.

Note that most companies and organizations have established policies around AI use and code generation. It's important to learn about and follow those policies and comply with any licensing requirements or restrictions. Some licenses may have specific clauses regarding contributions to the codebase and the use of third-party tools, including AI code generation tools like GitHub Copilot.
